asciidoctor/index.adoc, before:

= Ratpack on Open Shift
:openshift: ../.openshift/action_hooks
Andrew Reitz
2016 September 08

OpenShift is RedHat’s PaaS, and is very similar to Heroku. I was using Heroku for development of my
API but was having some issues and didn’t want to pay for hosting before my app was live.
The issues were that the connection my application to retrieve data from would time out. This is
most likely that my app was running on some Heroku server that was very far away from the API
server, and on the free tier I can not configure this. I started looking for other options that are
easy to use and would have a good free tier to get me up and running.

Now, finding something that is easy to use is very difficult. I can confirm that almost all
documentation for different host / cloud infrastructure is awful. I really can’t believe what some
of these companies post as “Documentation”. That being said, both Heroku, and OpenShift have much
better docs than the rest, but that is probably because they are very focused on a specific thing
than twenty or more “cloud” offerings. While we are judging docs, after Heroku and OpenShift, I
would say next comes Amazon, followed by Google and finally Microsoft, who somehow thinks that
linking videos is the same as documentation. That being said none of these are great, but
documentation is something we as an industry could do better at.

Anyways, I landed on OpenShift, since it gives me three free “gears” or apps that I can run.
This and the documentation seems like a perfect fit. I started digging into how to get Java 8 and
found that you can create custom “cartridges” or better described as setup scripts (wich you can
save and publish as a cartridge) for running Java 8 and your own applications that they do not have
a pre-defined cartridge for. Simple enough. Looks like I just need a build script that would run
gradle to produce my ratpack jar file, a script to run the application, and finally a script to
kill the ratpack application.

One thing that took me a bit to figure out was using the `OPENSHIFT_DIY_IP` and
`OPENSHIFT_DIY_PORT`. I would pass these values in using `-Dratpack.port` and `-Dratpack.address`
but would get an exception about not being able to bind to the address. As it turns out setting the
server bind address is a special case and thanks to this issue on
https://github.com/ratpack/ratpack/issues/1032[github] I was able to figure it out.

From the top let’s create a new ratpack application and get it to run on OpenShift.

First, you will want to sign up for an account on
https://www.openshift.com/devpreview/register.html[OpenShift]. This should be pretty simple since
they give you the option to log in with a github account.

We will be using lazybones to create a Ratpack application. This
is by far the easiest way to create a new Ratpack application, and saves you from writing all
the boilerplate. The easiest way to install lazybones is with http://sdkman.io/[SDK Man], but for
other installation instructions and usage see the
https://github.com/pledbrook/lazybones[lazybones project on GitHub].

Now that you have lazybones install, let's create our Ratpack application.

[source, bash]
----
$ lazybones create ratpack my-openshift-app
----

Next, you want to cd into the directory and create the `.openshift` folder with a `action_hooks`
subfolder. This folder will contain scripts that tell Open Shift how to manage your app.

[source, bash]
----
$ cd my-openshift-app
$ mkdir -p .openshift/action_hooks
----

First, let’s setup the `build` script. This will tell OpenShift how to build your project and where
to log the output too.

/.openshift/action_hooks/build
[source, bash]
----
include::{openshift}/build[]
----

Now, let’s make the start script. This will tell OpenShift how to start your application. A few
key things to note in this file are the exports. We need to set `JAVA_HOME` to
`/etc/alternatives/java_sdk_1.8.0` because the DIY cartridges ship with Java 1.7. Next we need to
set `RATPACK_SERVER__ADDRESS` and `RATPACK_SERVER__PORT` to the values provided by OpenShift DIY
cartridge to tell Ratpack what port and address to bind to. Without this you will get an exception
from netty about not being able to bind to a socket. Note that this script has `repo` in the path
and as the executable script. This is because no `settings.gradle` file is present setting the
project name. When this is the case the `shadow` task will name it based off of the project's
folder. In this case on OpenShift it will be repo.

/.openshift/action_hooks/start
[source, bash]
----
include::{openshift}/start[]
----

Lastly, we should make a stop script in order for the application to be shut down.

/.openshift/action_hooks/stop
[source, bash]
----
include::{openshift}/stop[]
----

Be sure to make all these files executable.
[source, bash]
----
$ chmod +x .openshift/action_hooks/*
----

Now that we have our project all setup, we need to create a project in OpenShift. Navigate to your
OpenShift Console and click the `Add Application…` button. At the bottom of the list of
cartridges to choose from there should be a Do-It-Yourself 0.1. Click it to select it. Fill out
a public URL you want, choose a region (at the time of this writing aws-us-east-1 is the only
option that will support Ratpack) and click Create Application.

You will now be at the next steps screen, you can ignore this and just click the link
"Continue to the application overview page". to get to the project dashboard.

Now in your project create a git repository and add your files.
Note: the lazybones ratpack project does not come with a `.gitignore`. This may be something you
want to add.

[source, bash]
----
$ git init
$ git add .
$ git commit -am "First Commit"
----

Now to deploy this code to OpenShift we need to add the remote repository that has been created for
our project. On your project's overview page copy the ssh url and add it as a remote to your
project.

[source, bash]
----
$ git remote add openshift URL_HERE
----

Finally to deploy your code to OpenShift simply run

[source, bash]
----
$ git push openshift master
----

This will run the `build` and `start` scripts once these complete you will be able to view your app.
To push any changes just make another commit to the repository and push it, and the changes will
take effect.

For an example project, and an asciidoctor version of this blog post (both which except pull
requests) click https://github.com/pieces029/ratpack-open-shift[here].

Commit message:

Added missing server config section

asciidoctor/index.adoc, after:

= Ratpack on Open Shift
:openshift: ../.openshift/action_hooks
Andrew Reitz
2016 September 08

OpenShift is RedHat’s PaaS, and is very similar to Heroku. I was using Heroku for development of my
API but was having some issues and didn’t want to pay for hosting before my app was live.
The issues were that the connection my application to retrieve data from would time out. This is
most likely that my app was running on some Heroku server that was very far away from the API
server, and on the free tier I can not configure this. I started looking for other options that are
easy to use and would have a good free tier to get me up and running.

Now, finding something that is easy to use is very difficult. I can confirm that almost all
documentation for different host / cloud infrastructure is awful. I really can’t believe what some
of these companies post as “Documentation”. That being said, both Heroku, and OpenShift have much
better docs than the rest, but that is probably because they are very focused on a specific thing
than twenty or more “cloud” offerings. While we are judging docs, after Heroku and OpenShift, I
would say next comes Amazon, followed by Google and finally Microsoft, who somehow thinks that
linking videos is the same as documentation. That being said none of these are great, but
documentation is something we as an industry could do better at.

Anyways, I landed on OpenShift, since it gives me three free “gears” or apps that I can run.
This and the documentation seems like a perfect fit. I started digging into how to get Java 8 and
found that you can create custom “cartridges” or better described as setup scripts (wich you can
save and publish as a cartridge) for running Java 8 and your own applications that they do not have
a pre-defined cartridge for. Simple enough. Looks like I just need a build script that would run
gradle to produce my ratpack jar file, a script to run the application, and finally a script to
kill the ratpack application.

One thing that took me a bit to figure out was using the `OPENSHIFT_DIY_IP` and
`OPENSHIFT_DIY_PORT`. I would pass these values in using `-Dratpack.port` and `-Dratpack.address`
but would get an exception about not being able to bind to the address. As it turns out setting the
server bind address is a special case and thanks to this issue on
https://github.com/ratpack/ratpack/issues/1032[github] I was able to figure it out.

From the top let’s create a new ratpack application and get it to run on OpenShift.

First, you will want to sign up for an account on
https://www.openshift.com/devpreview/register.html[OpenShift]. This should be pretty simple since
they give you the option to log in with a github account.

We will be using lazybones to create a Ratpack application. This
is by far the easiest way to create a new Ratpack application, and saves you from writing all
the boilerplate. The easiest way to install lazybones is with http://sdkman.io/[SDK Man], but for
other installation instructions and usage see the
https://github.com/pledbrook/lazybones[lazybones project on GitHub].

Now that you have lazybones install, let's create our Ratpack application.

[source, bash]
----
$ lazybones create ratpack my-openshift-app
----

Next, you want to cd into the directory and create the `.openshift` folder with a `action_hooks`
subfolder. This folder will contain scripts that tell Open Shift how to manage your app.

[source, bash]
----
$ cd my-openshift-app
$ mkdir -p .openshift/action_hooks
----

First, let’s setup the `build` script. This will tell OpenShift how to build your project and where
to log the output too.

/.openshift/action_hooks/build
[source, bash]
----
include::{openshift}/build[]
----

Now, let’s make the start script. This will tell OpenShift how to start your application. A few
key things to note in this file are the exports. We need to set `JAVA_HOME` to
`/etc/alternatives/java_sdk_1.8.0` because the DIY cartridges ship with Java 1.7. Next we need to
set `RATPACK_SERVER__ADDRESS` and `RATPACK_SERVER__PORT` to the values provided by OpenShift DIY
cartridge to tell Ratpack what port and address to bind to. Without this you will get an exception
from netty about not being able to bind to a socket. Note that this script has `repo` in the path
and as the executable script. This is because no `settings.gradle` file is present setting the
project name. When this is the case the `shadow` task will name it based off of the project's
folder. In this case on OpenShift it will be repo.

/.openshift/action_hooks/start
[source, bash]
----
include::{openshift}/start[]
----

In order for ratpack to know it should read in the values `RATPACK_SERVER__ADDRESS` and
`RATPACK_SERVER__PORT` `env()` will needed to be added to your applications serverconfig block.

[source, groovy]
----
include::../src/ratpack/Ratpack.groovy[lines=6..9]
----

Lastly, we should make a stop script in order for the application to be shut down.

/.openshift/action_hooks/stop
[source, bash]
----
include::{openshift}/stop[]
----

Be sure to make all these files executable.
[source, bash]
----
$ chmod +x .openshift/action_hooks/*
----

Now that we have our project all setup, we need to create a project in OpenShift. Navigate to your
OpenShift Console and click the `Add Application…` button. At the bottom of the list of
cartridges to choose from there should be a Do-It-Yourself 0.1. Click it to select it. Fill out
a public URL you want, choose a region (at the time of this writing aws-us-east-1 is the only
option that will support Ratpack) and click Create Application.

You will now be at the next steps screen, you can ignore this and just click the link
"Continue to the application overview page". to get to the project dashboard.

Now in your project create a git repository and add your files.
Note: the lazybones ratpack project does not come with a `.gitignore`. This may be something you
want to add.

[source, bash]
----
$ git init
$ git add .
$ git commit -am "First Commit"
----

Now to deploy this code to OpenShift we need to add the remote repository that has been created for
our project. On your project's overview page copy the ssh url and add it as a remote to your
project.

[source, bash]
----
$ git remote add openshift URL_HERE
----

Finally to deploy your code to OpenShift simply run

[source, bash]
----
$ git push openshift master
----

This will run the `build` and `start` scripts once these complete you will be able to view your app.
To push any changes just make another commit to the repository and push it, and the changes will
take effect.

For an example project, and an asciidoctor version of this blog post (both which except pull
requests) click https://github.com/pieces029/ratpack-open-shift[here].
